JUDY WOODRUFF: Violence
escalates in Eastern Ukraine, a
cease-fire on the brink after
rebels
clash with troops.
Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Also ahead this Thursday: Our
running series continues, with
South Carolina Senator Lindsey
Graham and his bid for the
Republican nomination.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus: cracking
Ebola's code. Scientists search
for live samples of deadly
diseases to uncover how
infections spread among animals
and jump into humans.
DR. PARDIS SABETI, Harvard
University: There are likely
some versions of Ebola that
don't
make you sick at all. There are
some versions that probably
don't infect humans at all.
And there are some that may
infect humans, but not spread
the way this does.
GWEN IFILL: Those are some of
the stories we're covering on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's word
this evening of an extensive new
government data breach.
It's widely reported that
suspected Chinese hackers broke
into the Interior Department
and the Office of Personnel
Management, which handles
security clearances. OPM says
data
for four million people
may be compromised.
Meanwhile, The New York Times
and ProPublica report that the
National Security Agency
expanded
its Internet spying in 2012 to
cover foreign cyber-attacks.
The surveillance is not
regulated
by the USA Freedom Act
just signed into law.
GWEN IFILL: Floods and fire
rocked the West African state of
Ghana early today, killing
at least 150 people. The
victims were sheltering at a gas
station in the capital city of
Accra.
It exploded when flames from a
nearby fire reached fuel that
spilled into the floodwaters.
Cell phone footage showed
fires burning out of control.
Ghana's president blamed the
disaster partly on homes that
blocked drainage systems and
led to the flooding.
JOHN DRAMANI MAHAMA, President
of Ghana: We will have to take
some measures to be able
to avoid this happening in the
future. And, often, when these
measures are drastic, you
have a lot of sympathy and
pressure not to take those
measures. But I think that the
time has come, you know, for us
to remove houses out of water
waste.
GWEN IFILL: In addition to
those killed in the explosion,
local accounts said many
others drowned in
the high water.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In China,
recovery teams began work to
right a cruise ship that
capsized
Monday on the Yangtze River.
More than 200 divers have
searched the ship, and recovered
77 bodies, including some pulled
from holes cut into the hull.
But more than 360 people
are still missing.
XU CHENGGUANG, Spokesman,
Chinese Ministry of
Transportation (through
translator): The
reason why we have decided to
upright the ship is that, first,
we haven't been able
to find any more survivors after
the recent rescue work, and,
second, according to experts'
analysis, there is very slim
hope of finding any survivors in
the ship.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Communist Party
leaders promised today there
will be no cover-up in the
disaster.
But they also directed police
to -- quote -- "safeguard social
stability," all of this
as thousands in Hong Kong marked
26 years since government tanks
and troops crushed
protests in Beijing's Tiananmen
Square. It is the only place in
China where such vigils
are allowed.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, the family of a Boston
man killed by police said
reports
that he'd become an Islamist
radical are a complete shock.
They called for a thorough
investigation of his fatal
shooting. Usaama Rahim had been
under surveillance in a terror
investigation. Police say they
fired when he came at them with
a knife.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Public tributes
began in Delaware today for Beau
Biden, the vice president's
eldest son. He died last
weekend of brain cancer. The
former state attorney general
lay in honor in the
Delaware Senate chamber.
Vice President Biden and other
family members attended a brief
service and spent much of
the afternoon greeting mourners.
The funeral will be held
Saturday.
GWEN IFILL: Former Texas
Governor Rick Perry today
formally opened his second bid
for the
Republican presidential
nomination. His first attempt
collapsed in 2012 after a series
of gaffes. Perry made his
declaration at an airport hangar
in Addison, Texas. Perry
was flanked by former Navy SEALs
as he declared the end of an era
of failed leadership.
RICK PERRY (R), Presidential
Candidate: We don't have to
accept slow growth that leaves
behind the middle class, that
leaves millions of Americans out
of work. We don't have
to settle for crumbling
bureaucracies that target
taxpayers and harm our veterans.
We
don't have to resign ourselves
to debt and decay and slow
growth. We have the power
to make things new again.
GWEN IFILL: Also today, aides
to former Florida Governor Jeb
Bush confirmed he will
formally announce his own
presidential run June 15. And
on the campaign trail,
Democratic
front-runner Hillary Clinton
called for automatic voter
registration for 18-year-olds,
while
denouncing Republican efforts
to enact voter I.D. laws.
The U.S. House of
Representatives voted today to
keep restrictions on travel to
Cuba. Majority
Republicans attached the
provision to a transportation
bill. It's a direct rebuff to
President
Obama's diplomatic opening to
Havana, and the White House has
threatened a veto, if
the bill gets
through the Senate.
The government has concluded
that hydraulic fracturing, or
fracking, doesn't do widespread
harm to drinking water. That's
in a draft report today from the
Environmental Protection
Agency. The study tracked water
injected deep underground, in
fracking, to open oil
and gas deposits.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Doctors in Texas
have performed the world's first
partial skull and scalp
transplant. The recipient was
Jim Boysen, a 55-year-old cancer
patient from Austin.
Radiation treatments had
destroyed part of his skull, and
he also needed a new kidney
and pancreas because
of diabetes.
At a Houston hospital today, he
said he opted for an
experimental 15-hour operation
to do
everything at once.
JIM BOYSEN, Transplant Patient:
I mean, I couldn't get
transplant surgery I needed
for the organs without fixing my
scalp, but I couldn't fix my
scalp because of the failure
of the organs. So I was in a
catch-22, like between a rock
and a hard place. And so
I said, sure, I'm open to that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The operation
was performed on May 22.
GWEN IFILL: And it was a long
day on Wall Street. Stocks fell
after Greece announced
it won't make a payment due
tomorrow to the IMF and other
creditors, this after days of
talks that seemed to be
headed to a resolution.
The Dow Jones Industrials
dropped 170 points to close back
near 17900. The Nasdaq fell
40 points, and the
S&P 500 was down 18.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour": unrest in
Ukraine, violence in the east
shatters
a cease-fire; Senator Lindsey
Graham on his presidential bid;
scientists search for elusive
live samples of Ebola in animals
to uncover how humans become
infected; front-runners
and underdogs in the world of
sports; and personal butlers for
the masses, a service
that can cater to
your every need.
GWEN IFILL: Ukrainian president
Petro Poroshenko told his
military today to prepare for a
possible
full-scale invasion from Russia.
The remarks came one day after a
new outbreak of fighting
in Eastern Ukraine, which
claimed the lives of more than
25 people and injured dozens
more.
Speaking to the Ukrainian
Parliament, Poroshenko described
what he called a colossal threat
of the resumption of large-scale
hostilities by Russian and
terrorist forces. And he
said, contrary to Moscow's
denials, those Russian troops
are in rebel-controlled areas.
PETRO POROSHENKO, Ukrainian
President (through translator):
In Ukrainian territory, there
are 14 Russian battalions,
tactical groups that include
over 9,000 Russian military
servicemen.
The concentration of Russian
servicemen along the national
border with Ukraine is
1.5 times bigger
than a year ago.
The military must be ready as
much for a renewal of an
offensive by the enemy in the
Donbass
as they are for a full-scale
invasion along the whole length
of the border with Russia.
We must be truly ready for this.
GWEN IFILL: A cease-fire signed
in February has been steadily
crumbling, as international
monitors report
regular violations.
David Herszenhorn of The New
York Times has been following
the story from Moscow.
Those were pretty strong words
from Petro Poroshenko today,
David. And they were backed
up from what NATO -- by what
NATO has been saying as well.
DAVID HERSZENHORN, The New York
Times: There's no question,
Gwen.
What we see is that we have
entered a very tense, in fact,
obviously quite dangerous
period of time, where Ukraine's
Western allies, especially
France and Germany, have become
extremely frustrated by the slow
pace, the failure actually to
implement that Minsk 2
cease-fire accord signed
back in February.
And so what we see is an
increase in hostilities, as both
sides are trying to show that
the
other is responsible for these
violations, for the increase in
violence and for the failure
to move forward with political
compromises need for a long-term
settlement.
GWEN IFILL: What has happened
between -- since February,
between now and then, that's
resulted
in this latest kind of
explosion of violence?
DAVID HERSZENHORN: Well, what
we see now is that the European
Union has begun to consider
whether to extend economic
sanctions against Russia. Those
are set to expire without
any further action
by the end of July.
The cease-fire had been mostly
holding, but as each side tries
to position itself, of
course, we expect that this kind
of violence will flare up. At
the same time, Petro Poroshenko
has now come upon a full year
since his inauguration. It's
been a very tough year for
Ukraine.
He made that clear
in his speech today.
The country is suffering
greatly. And the economy is on
the verge of collapse. They
feel this constant threat of
war. And so the tensions really
are running high. And
now, as we push toward this
question of a renewal of
sanctions, each side wants to
show
that the other is more at fault,
laying the groundwork for what
could be tough talks ahead.
GWEN IFILL: What, if any,
evidence does Poroshenko or NATO
or anyone have of the presence
of Russian activity
along the border?
DAVID HERSZENHORN: Well, there
is no question, amid all the
finger-pointing, there are
certain
things that we know
in fact are true.
There's a lot of heavy
equipment, tanks, weaponry that
is on the ground still in
Eastern Ukraine.
Most of that appears, if not
all of it, to have come from
Russia across the border,
which is unsecured. That border
is open. There are vehicles,
fighters able to pass
back and forth, whether they're
volunteers, as Russia has
insisted, or regular forces
of the Russian Federation, as
Mr. Poroshenko is suggesting.
So we have that evidence. We
also have the international
monitors from the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in
Europe pointing out the other
day that they'd actually
encountered
some fighters in Russian
uniform. They have not said
that before, where they actually
see the insignias of
the Russian military.
At the same time, Ukraine has
captured two soldiers, fighters
that it said were regular
duty active Russian military
personnel. They have said the
same thing. Of course, they're
in captivity. They're being
held in a military hospital in
Kiev, the hospital, and so there
is increasing evidence that in
fact Russia's intervention in
Ukraine continues.
GWEN IFILL: So does that mean
that the cease-fire that was so
painstakingly hammered out is
basically no longer worth
the paper it's printed on?
DAVID HERSZENHORN: Well, the
cease-fire has been precarious
all along.
What we have seen now is that
certainly Ukraine will be
pressuring its allies, the
United
States and Europe, to make sure
that there is no letup in
economic sanctions against
Russia. There is obviously
fatigue in the West. Some of
the European countries are
suffering quite a great deal
themselves from countersanctions
that Russia has imposed.
So I think we will see again
quite a bit of tension as we
move toward this question
in Brussels of whether to
renew sanctions or not.
GWEN IFILL: So, no matter how
you look at it, whether the
sanctions are working or not,
whether Russia is there or not,
it sounds like there is another
spiral under way.
DAVID HERSZENHORN: There's no
question there's another spiral
under way.
And what the West is grappling
with is really a lack of will on
both sides to implement
that cease-fire accord that was
signed in February. For each
side, it seems that the
status quo is preferable to
moving forward with the really
tough political decisions
that need to be made.
One of the things Mr. Poroshenko
has been pushing for is a
decentralization process
in Ukraine, which would give
more power to mayors,
essentially making governors and
officials
at the regional level sort of an
intermediary between the federal
government and local government.
Of course, in Eastern Ukraine,
what the separatists,
pro-Russian side, and Russia
would like to see, are very
strong governors, perhaps even
presidents of the autonomous
regions of Donetsk and Luhansk,
who are potentially more loyal
to Moscow than they are to Kiev.
So there are very different
views of what the future
politically ought to look like
in Ukraine. And pushing off
those tough questions seems to
be what a lot of these
new hostilities are about.
GWEN IFILL: David Herszenhorn,
reporting from Moscow for The
New York Times tonight,
thank you.
DAVID HERSZENHORN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The 2016 race
for president reached a clear
critical mass, with four more
candidates announcing this week.
The first of those came Monday
in a small town in South
Carolina from the state's
senior senator, Lindsey Graham.
As part of our series of
interviews with presidential
candidates, he joins me now from
New York.
Senator Graham, thank
you for being with us.
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-SC),
Presidential Candidate: Thank
you.
You're going to be interviewing
people all year, it looks like.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Senator, in
your announcement speech this
week, you talked about wanting
to be the president to protect
America. You talked about
serious threats, about the world
exploding in terror and
violence. And you said there
are forces trying to kill us.
Just how vulnerable and weak
do you believe America is?
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: I think,
the stronger they get over
there, the more exposed we are
here.
There's more terrorist
organizations with safe havens,
weapons capability, men and
money
to attack us since 9/11. I'm
very worried. We need to make
them poor, small and on
the run, because they're large,
rich and entrenched. And if we
don't up our game against these
groups, we're going
to get hit hard here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, you have
talked about being prepared to
send troops, American troops
to Iraq.
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM:
Yes. Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why is
that the right answer?
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, we
need lines of defenses over
there so they can't come
here.
The ISIL safe havens in Ramadi
and Mosul and in Syria present a
threat to us. I think
foreign fighters flowing in to
join the ranks of ISIL with
Western passports, it's just
a matter of time before somebody
penetrates our network and hits
us here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Senator, as
you know, you're not the only
candidate talking tough,
in effect, about ISIS. A number
of the other Republicans are
saying President Obama hasn't
done enough.
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marco Rubio, Jeb
Bush, Rick Perry today. Rick
Santorum is agreeing with
you, sends troops.
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes. Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why wouldn't one
of them be a more capable leader
than you would be?
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well,
they're all fine people, but, at
the end of the day, I have
been to Iraq and Afghanistan as
a reservist and as a United
States senator over 30 times.
I have been in the Air
Force for 33 years.
I would put my credentials up
against anyone in terms of
understanding the region, the
players. I know almost
everybody over there, and, most
importantly, they know me. So
I have learned the hard way. I
have spent a lot of time on the
ground. I have made
my fair share of mistakes.
Disbanding the Iraqi army after
the invasion of Iraq in 2003,
clearly, in hindsight,
was a mistake.
When Bush got it wrong, Senator
McCain and myself spoke up. At
the end of the day,
I think I understand the dynamic
that we face. And I'm best
prepared to be commander in
chief on day one, with all due
respect to my other colleagues,
including Hillary Clinton.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But how would
you persuade the American people
it's the right thing to
do, after fighting two wars,
Iraq, Afghanistan, after the
fact that Defense Secretary
Ashton
Carter has said the Iraqi troops
themselves have not been willing
to fight; neighboring
countries are not sending
troops in there?
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, I
think the American people pretty
well understand that radical
Islam has an agenda that
includes us. They want to do
three things, purify their
religion
-- and they're killing every
Muslim they get their hands on
that doesn't agree with them
-- destroy the Christian faith
-- they're doing a pretty good
job of that -- and destroy
the state of Israel and
eventually come after us.
I think most Americans
understand that radical Islam
can't be compromised with or
appeased.
And the only way we can be safe
is to form partnerships over
there that will protect
us over here. And we left Iraq
too soon. And if we don't leave
at least 10,000 troops
behind in Afghanistan,
then it will fall apart.
So, my belief is that a line of
defense over there is necessary
to protect us here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me turn you
to something else, Senator. You
have spoken yourself
-- you came from a modest
background. Both of your
parents died when you were still
in
college. You raised
your younger sister.
She gives you credit for being
her big brother and her father
and her mother at the same
time. How did that
experience shape you?
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes,
it shaped me a lot.
I mean, one day, everything is
great. The next day, my life is
turned upside down. Most
people, Judy, are one car wreck
away from needing somebody's
help. So, I don't take
anything for granted much
anymore. Everything was fine.
My mom got diagnosed with
Hodgkin's
disease. Six months later, she
passes. The medical bills wiped
us out.
Fifteen months after that, my
dad dies. I'm 22. My sister is
13. Our life is turned
upside down. An aunt and uncle
helped me raise my sister. They
never made over $25,000
in their life.
If it weren't for Social
Security survivor benefits
coming into my family, to my
sister
as a minor, we'd have had a hard
time paying the bills. Student
loans helped my sister
go to college. So, I would do
almost anything to save Social
Security. I'm 59 years old.
I'm not married. I don't have
any kids, and I'm really doing
really well financially.
If I need to give up some
benefits, change my COLA, I
would to save Social Security.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking
of that, you know, give us some
specifics on that. How
high would you raise the
retirement age? You have talked
about younger workers working
longer.
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have talked
about raising Social Security
premiums, asking people to
take a cut. How big a cut?
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, what
I would do is I would take
Simpson-Bowles out and
dust it off, adjust the age of
retirement based on the
actuarial needs of the country.
It goes to 67. Ronald Reagan
went from -- and Tip O'Neill
went from 65 to 67. We need
to adjust it again because we're
living so much longer. Social
Security is a system
that keeps half of today's
seniors out of poverty. And
people on my income level are
going to have to give up some of
their benefits to protect the
system, because it's running
out of money.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two other
things, Senator. You have taken
positions on climate change,
on immigration that many
Republicans disagree with. You
have opponents today who are
talking
about toughening their
position on immigration.
At the same time, you have long
advocated a legal path to
citizenship for undocumented
immigrants. Are your opponents
making a mistake by toughening
their position?
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM:
Absolutely.
In my view, you have got to
secure your border or you will
never fix this problem. But
you're not going to just fix the
problem by building a wall. The
reason we have 11 million
illegal immigrants is they come
here to get jobs. They come
from poor and corrupt countries,
and it's an economic problem.
You have got to increase legal
immigration, not restrict
it.
Eighty million baby boomers are
going to die out in the next 20,
30 or 40 years. And
who is going to replace us in
the work force? We're a
declining population. We're
down
to two workers for every retiree
in the next 20 years. We're
going to need a viable legal
immigration system.
So those people who want to
restrict legal immigration are
not looking at the demographic.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally,
Senator, if you were elected
president, you would be first
bachelor to take office since
Grover Cleveland in 1885.
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM:
Yes, that's right.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is
that a disadvantage?
And I ask because the role of
the spouse of the president has
become a very full role.
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Serious issues,
the first ladies have taken on,
Michelle Obama, Laura
Bush, Nancy Reagan.
Would you need someone to fill
that role, were you to be
elected?
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, I
think we will find a way to
accommodate that particular
need. But I think
America can handle this.
Here's the test for me: What
can I do for your family? What
can I do to help you and
your kids, if you have children?
What can I do to keep America
safe and to keep us prosperous
and secure at home and deal with
the retirement of the baby
boomers?
I have got no problems. The
people of South Carolina have
elected me for the last 20
years.
And I'm proud. I do have
family. I'm not married. I
don't have kids, but I do
understand family, and I
understand how precious family
is. So I think America can
handle
this. But we will see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Lindsey
Graham, we thank you very much
for talking with us.
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, we
launch a series of reports on
the Ebola crisis.
Science correspondent Miles
O'Brien traveled to West Africa
to examine how the deadly virus
took hold.
DR. LINA MOSES, Tulane
University Viral Hemorrhagic
Fever Program: Kenema became
the epicenter
of the outbreak in July.
MILES O'BRIEN: Lina Moses is
back at it, on the trail of a
killer virus near Kenema,
Sierra Leone. She is still
haunted by memories of the worst
days of the Ebola epidemic last
year.
DR. LINA MOSES: We didn't go
searching for Ebola. Ebola came
to us. It came with
a vengeance.
MILES O'BRIEN: She took us to
the remote villages of Kpalu.
DR. LINA MOSES: This is the
first time we have trapped for a
while since the Ebola outbreak
started.
MILES O'BRIEN: An
epidemiologist and disease
ecologist with Tulane
University's Viral Hemorrhagic
Fever Program, Lina leads a team
focused primarily on a virus
with Ebola-like symptoms, Lassa
fever. Lassa and Ebola are
so-called zoonotic diseases
caused by viruses, parasites or
bacteria
that are normally spread among
animals, but occasionally spill
over to humans, often causing
severe disease.
Understanding how these viruses
make the jump into humans is at
the core of her research.
DR. LINA MOSES: Any time you're
looking at zoonotic disease, you
have to start looking
at the animal that carries it,
the animal that maintains it in
nature, and that's the
only way you can
start to control it.
MILES O'BRIEN: We are hoping to
trap the Lassa virus inside its
animal host, or reservoir,
a common African rat.
DR. LINA MOSES: We estimate
that 80 percent of all Lassa
fever cases come directly from
rodent to human. So, really,
what we're trying to do is break
that rodent-to-human
relationship.
MILES O'BRIEN: Lina's team
baits two dozen traps with
peanut butter, oats, palm oil
and
dried fish, and leaves them
overnight. And while we all
sleep, our night-vision camera
catches a curious rat known as
Mastomys natalensis, the
reservoir species for Lassa
fever. This
one didn't take the bait.
But another one does, as we
discover on our return the next
morning. James Koninga quickly
suits up for a field necropsy.
He works inside a roped-off
area, a safe distance from the
center of the village. He is a
seasoned a hand at this
dangerous task. There is good
reason for the caution. Ebola
may
get all the media attention, but
Lassa fever is nearly as deadly,
in this part of Sierra
Leone, a fatality rate
of nearly 70 percent.
JAMES KONINGA, Lassa Fever
Program, Kenema Government
Hospital: It's the most
dangerous
part of it. I have
to be very careful.
MILES O'BRIEN: What is the risk
here if the rat has the Lassa
fever virus? How dangerous
or potentially dangerous is it?
DR. LINA MOSES: Well, it's
similar to -- I liken it to
health care workers in an Ebola
treatment center. They get
urinated on. They could get bit
if the rodent is not
properly anesthetized. So, the
risks of actually getting --
getting infected from
are Lassa just as high.
MILES O'BRIEN: Koninga has been
doing this since the 1970s. For
the past 20 years,
he has helped in the frustrating
hunt for the Ebola virus as
well.
JAMES KONINGA: We collected up
to 3,000 animals, birds,
rodents, bats, you name them,
even domesticated animals.
MILES O'BRIEN: They even looked
at mosquitoes and bedbugs. All
that, and there's never
been a smoking gun, never
any sign of the live virus.
But there is a prime suspect:
fruit bats. That's because
researchers found Ebola
antibodies
in several bat species, meaning
they must have been infected
with the virus or some
version of the virus. Fruit
bats also are host to Marburg
virus, in the same family
as Ebola. The first person
known to die of Ebola in this
epidemic, the so-called index
case, in December 2013, was a
young Guinean boy who played
beneath this tree, which was
infested with bats.
It has since burned, making it
impossible to know for sure if
this was where and how
he got sick. Researchers know
much less about Ebola than Lassa
fever.
DR. LINA MOSES: You get hot
spots. So you will get villages
that have a lot of cases
for maybe one or two years,
and then they quiet down.
MILES O'BRIEN: If you ever saw
Ebola in a rat here, that would
be significant, yes.
DR. LINA MOSES: I would be
nervous, yes, definitely
nervous.
MILES O'BRIEN: Historically,
Ebola has been a cold case
investigation for
epidemiologists.
It appeared and vanished,
sometimes for years, all in very
remote places, until this
outbreak.
This time, better roads and
deeper human encroachment into
the bush sent Ebola on a
dangerous journey,
into teeming places dense with
potential victims. This was the
first time Ebola came to cities,
and that was a big part of the
problem. This is the Kroo Bay
slum in Freetown, Sierra Leone.
There's no electricity, no
running water, and you really
don't have to use your
imagination
to understand that Ebola here
could quickly spread out of
control.
But is it simply demographics
that made the outbreak so
deadly? Or is it biology as
well?
DR. PARDIS SABETI, Harvard
University: There are likely
some versions of Ebola that
don't
make you sick at all. There are
some versions that probably
don't infect humans at all.
And there are some that may
infect humans, but not spread
the way this does.
MILES O'BRIEN: Computational
genomicist Pardis Sabeti is a
Harvard professor in the
vanguard of efforts to better
understand Ebola by studying its
genetic characteristics.
She led the study that
made the genetic link
between the index case to the
thousands that followed, all
from human-to-human contact.
It's a family tree of virus
cousins, but with 99 distinct
Ebola genomes, hundreds of
mutations, making
them different.
DR. PARDIS SABETI: They are
replicating through each
transmission, every eight-day
cycle, as a new set of viruses
that are going to be able to
released to another individual.
And so we are just talking
about a much faster time period
in which evolution can
happen. It's changing, not just
between individuals, but within
individuals.
It starts replicating and it's
making lots of copies of itself
and, every once in a while,
will make a mistake and these
mutations emerge. And so we do
have to pay attention, because
we are not always dealing with a
single entity. We are dealing
with a changing entity.
MILES O'BRIEN: Back in Sierra
Leone, Lina Moses is wondering
what it will look like
next time. While the epidemic
was unprecedented, Ebola, as it
turns out, wasn't a new visitor
to West Africa. Researchers
recently took a fresh look at
old blood samples from patients
here with previously unknown
diseases, and they found Ebola
antibodies.
DR. LINA MOSES: So, it looks
like this is not the first
introduction of Ebola into
Sierra
Leone and into this region, and
it's not going to be the last.
MILES O'BRIEN: At the
government hospital where Lina
is based, they are getting ready
for the next time, building a
U.S. Pentagon funded-research
facility and isolation ward.
Beside it is the grave of one
of Sierra Leone's leading
epidemiologists, who died
here last year treating
Ebola patients.
DR. LINA MOSES: It was pretty
awful, actually. There were --
people who really scared.
What they call IPC, infection
prevention and control, wasn't
in place to any measure
that would protect people, and
a lot of people got sick.
MILES O'BRIEN: Friends?
How many did you lose?
DR. LINA MOSES: The people that
I worked with for several years,
we lost nine of our
staff, most of them very good
and personal friends of mine.
So...
MILES O'BRIEN: In Freetown, the
main cemetery is now filled, too
many fresh graves. The
crisis may have waned, but the
virus lives on, a threat that
can't be easily buried.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Freetown, Sierra
Leone.
GWEN IFILL: Tune in tomorrow
night, as Miles explores how
health workers are trying to
develop a rapid test for Ebola.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next, we take a
look at a big sports weekend
coming up, with several
championship playoffs and a
high-stakes horse race in the
offing.
And, as William Brangham tells
us, in some places, it's already
begun.
For a closer look at this
smorgasbord of contests, I am
joined by two longtime sports
writers.
Kevin Blackistone is a
professor of sports journalism
at the University of Maryland,
as well as a panelist on ESPN.
And Mike Pesca is host of
Slate's daily podcast "The
Gist" and a contributor to NPR.
Gentlemen, welcome.
Welcome. Join us.
KEVIN BLACKISTONE, University
of Maryland: Thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Kevin, let's
talk about the NBA first. These
are two long-suffering
teams, two long-suffering towns.
LeBron James' greatness, it's a
given.
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: Right.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But can he
carry his team past Golden
State?
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: Well, if he
does, he certainly will have
etched his name in the
pantheon of NBA greats, because
this is the most likely -- most
-- the least likely team
that he's been with that he
could take to a championship.
He was brought there or went
back there, and he was
celebrated by the city. The
team
imported Kevin Love, another
superstar player, to play
alongside him. He's hurt. The
other superstar player in
Cleveland, Kyrie Irving, has
been injured for quite some time
and is going to be a little
bit labored in this series.
And so if he can deliver a
championship to Cleveland, he
will literally have done so
carrying this franchise
on his back.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Mike Pesca,
what do you think about that?
Is this an issue of one
man having to beat 12 men?
MIKE PESCA, National Public
Radio: Well, I would say -- and
I bet Kevin agrees -- that
LeBron is already a
pantheon etcher.
But it's just such a big task,
because we haven't even
mentioned any of the Golden
State
Warriors. And Steph Curry is
the reigning MVP, a deserved
MVP. I'm not going to say
that LeBron is not the best
player in the NBA, but Steph had
a great year, scoring 29
points a game in the playoffs.
And it's every player after him
on the Golden State roster that
is better than their equal
number on the Cleveland roster.
So, I really do think Golden
State not only has a tremendous
edge, plays great defense, and
is a big favorite in Las Vegas,
and the guys who do the advanced
stats say they're an even bigger
favorite than the bettors would
have you believe. It's
a huge task for LeBron.
That's why we watch.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's right.
All right, let's talk about the
Belmont Stakes. American
Pharoah, this is a huge
potential
accomplishment for this horse.
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: Sure.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's been 40
years since a horse has won the
Triple Crown. Why is
this such a tough
thing to crack?
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: Well,
because it's a hard race. You
have to win two races to
get there, and then, in this
final weekend, you have to run,
the horse does, a
mile-and-a-half.
And it's a grueling
And I just think it's the weight
of history. I have been to
these things several times,
from Smarty Jones and, was it
Funny Cide, and the anticipation
is great. Everybody
in the world is watching. And
it's almost like Lucy and
Charlie Brown and the football.
You know, we get suckered into
this thing, and then once again
it just doesn't happen.
But it's a great anticipatory
sporting event, and that's why
people tune in. That's why
usually about 2.5 times more
people tune in to watch a Triple
Crown possibility than would
watch the Belmont Stakes
if nothing was going on.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Mike Pesca.
MIKE PESCA: I would also add
that it might be -- well, I was
going to say, it might be
a little bit more about Snoopy,
because these are animals,
right?
(LAUGHTER)
MIKE PESCA: And they're just
bred differently than they were
125 years ago, where horses
were more robust. It's not a
knock against the modern horse.
The modern horse is like
a Ferrari. It's like a
high-speed car, but the recovery
time is such that it is quite
unlikely that any horse will
ever win the Triple Crown again,
I think.
It's happened what, a dozen
times since Affirmed
won it in '78.
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: Right.
MIKE PESCA: And a dozen times,
we have been disappointed.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
OK. Let's move on.
Saturday, we're going to see the
women's World Cup. This is
obviously a huge deal here
in the U.S. But we can't
overlook the fact that there's
this controversy around FIFA.
How much do you think the cloud
of that is going to tarnish this
tournament, or will
it have no bearing?
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: You know, I
don't think it will have any
bearing. I think American
sports fans overlook scandal.
If look at the National Football
League and Deflategate,
I don't think anybody
cared at the end.
If you look at Major League
Baseball and the steroids era, I
don't think anybody cared
in the end. The big debate is
among sportswriters, in terms of
what this will mean, and maybe
some people within the industry,
but I don't think anybody is
going to conflate what has
happened with FIFA's executive
leadership and the corruption
and what has happened with
the women's game.
I don't think Amy (sic) Wambach
is going to have to suffer any
of those slings and arrows.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Mike Pesca,
the president of FIFA, Sepp
Blatter, despite his litany
of sexist comments, really did
reign over a period of
incredible growth in women's
soccer.
Is that a silver lining, do you
think, to his career, amidst all
this controversy?
MIKE PESCA: Oh, I think, like a
lot of the accomplishments of
Sepp Blatter, it happened
on his watch. Maybe it was a
correlation, but not causality.
I think women's sports, Title IX
in America is what one of the
huge reasons that made
soccer big. And, you know, he
up until a couple of years ago
was talking about having
the women wear tighter shorts.
And, you know, they're playing
this World Cup. I totally agree
with Kevin. This
is not -- that nothing should be
taken away from the women, and I
don't think it will
be, but FIFA is making them play
on artificial turf. And this is
unfair. Unlike the NFL,
where the problem is actually
with the league and concussions,
the sport of soccer is
brilliant.
The sport of soccer is pristine.
It's just these crooks -- I will
say it at the top -- even as
regards the women's game,
that we should have a lot of
horrible feelings about. We
should be really concerned about
that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's not
forget the Stanley Cup is, of
course, going on.
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: Right.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Some very
enjoyable hockey going on there.
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: And it is.
I watched last night's game.
And everything turned
in less than two minutes at the
end. The Lightning are a fun
team to watch, assemble
a lot of speed, a lot of
up-tempo hockey, if you can
actually have that. And the
Blackhawks
are an old-school type of
team. They're grinders.
And last night, they ground out
an improbable win. But if there
is one reason to turn
into this NHL Stanley Cup
Finals, it's to watch the
skaters with the Tampa Bay
Lightning.
They are really a lot of fun to
watch. We mentioned earlier
Steph Curry. Mike did.
Well, Tyler Johnson is kind of
a Steph Curry in the NHL,
undersized, which is why people
passed on him in the draft,
always doubted him. And he's
turned into a fabulous, exciting
scorer in the league.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Mike Pesca,
Chicago, this is -- they're in
their third Cup in six years.
And this is during the salary
cap era in hockey. This is a
pretty big accomplishment.
MIKE PESCA: It is.
And they have done it -- the NHL
might never have another
dynasty, because the salary cap
era makes it so hard to resign
stars. They do give teams a
little bit of leeway resigning
their own stars, but this core
of players has been around and
contributing. They do
have some young players, but if
you want to talk about Toews --
their goalie, Corey Crawford,
he's -- he spans not
all the Stanley Cups.
But it's an example, if you get
to know a team, that team could
really win the heart
of a city. And I think every so
often, Tampa Bay looks and says,
hey, we got a hockey team,
whereas Chicago lives and
dies with these Blackhawks.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's right.
OK. Kevin Blackistone, Mike
Pesca, thank you both very much
for joining us.
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: Thank you.
MIKE PESCA: You're welcome.
GWEN IFILL: We will be back
with our weekly feature Making
Sense. Paul Solman looks
at an app that brings butler
service to the masses. It's
something you won't want to
miss.
But, first, it's pledge week on
PBS. This break allows your
public television station
to ask for your support. And
that support helps keep programs
like ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
an on-demand assistant for those
with too much to do and
too little time.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman has the story. It's
part of our ongoing reporting
Making Sense, which airs every
Thursday on the "NewsHour."
DR. EMMA STANTON, Hello Alfred
Client: As a single person
living on my own, the only
reason I have so much stuff in
my fridge is because somebody
else has bothered to do the
shopping for me.
PAUL SOLMAN: When Dr. Emma
Stanton moved to Boston this
spring, work left little time
for prepping her new apartment.
DR. EMMA STANTON: It was
cleaned when I moved in, which
was about nine days ago.
PAUL SOLMAN: Or choosing
a new coffee maker.
DR. EMMA STANTON: I just asked
for particular recommendations,
and this was one of three
they suggested.
PAUL SOLMAN: Cleaning
her clothes.
DR. EMMA STANTON: This is my
laundry. I just chuck it in
here. The Alfred comes
and picks it up.
PAUL SOLMAN: And who exactly is
Alfred? A new online service,
the company's name,
Hello Alfred, inspired by
Batman's ultimate butler.
MICHAEL CAINE, Actor: A problem
with the graphite, sir.
PAUL SOLMAN: Who caters to
needs you didn't even know you
had.
MICHAEL CAINE: May I suggest
you try to avoid landing on your
head?
PAUL SOLMAN: Now, if you really
want to outsource your chores
these days, there are
apps galore, among them
Instacart for shopping, Homejoy
for cleaning. But Stanton's
Alfred
does it all.
DR. EMMA STANTON: Hello Alfred
were able to be here last week,
when I had my Wi-Fi
installed in my new apartment.
Hello Alfred were able to be
here when a storage company
came to pick up a box that I
needed to go to storage, and
deal with some of the other
hassles that happen
when you move house.
PAUL SOLMAN: Hello Alfred was
conceived by Marcela Sapone and
Jess Beck, who both
pulled out of Harvard Business
School last year to scale up the
business of butlering.
WOMAN: And the winner of the
2014 Disrupt San Francisco
Battlefield Competition is
Alfred.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: Sapone's case in
point in pitching Alfred at a
high-powered startup competition
was harried, hypothetical Dan.
MARCELA SAPONE, CEO, Hello
Alfred: The butler you never
had, for the very first time,
the
luxury of personal service for
the rest of us. For $99 a
month, Dan can get his very
own Alfred that visits once a
week, every week, on set days to
take care of his household
chores.
PAUL SOLMAN: Alfred was
suddenly on the app map. And
within months, Sapone and Beck
had more than $12 million in
funding, for an idea they'd come
up with while working
on Wall Street.
MARCELA SAPONE: We were working
90-hour workweeks. I mean, you
barely saw the light
of day. I wasn't doing a good
job of taking care of myself.
PAUL SOLMAN: So far, Alfred is
taking care of clients who can
easily afford an extra
$25 a week only in New York and
Boston. But Sapone already has
a waiting list and plans
to expand wherever there are
dense clusters of customers.
MARCELA SAPONE: I'm giving
people back time. Life is
actually becoming unmanageable.
And the hours that we're
working are going up, and the
amount of complexity in our
lives
is only going up.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, a good deal
for clients, but what about the
Alfreds? Eeva Lee moved
to New York from Finland last
summer. A psychologist, she now
works part-time, 25
hours a week or more, as an
Alfred, perambulating Greenwich
Village with as much as 50
pounds
in tow.
EEVA LEE, Alfred Client Manager:
Sometimes, you have a lot to
carry on you. You can
take it as an exercise, and
don't have to go to the gym
later.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: Especially
given the flights of stairs.
EEVA LEE: Usual day, it's like
anywhere from 20 to 40,
depending on how many elevator
buildings I have. I don't know
if my iPhone has a jinx on it,
but it claims to me that
there's one day that I have done
80. But that sounds crazy, even
in this job.
PAUL SOLMAN: Would you not
rather be practicing psychology
than doing what you're doing?
EEVA LEE: Of course I would
like to do what I have the
education for. But I understand
how important, wherever you work
in the world, it is to know the
culture and the people and
the ways of working. And I'm
getting that education all the
time as I work. The other
very nice thing is that
I sleep like a baby.
PAUL SOLMAN: Unlike other
on-demand services, which rely
on low-paid contract workers,
CEO
Sapone says Alfreds are
employees who earn $18 to $30 an
hour. But how do the economics
work if clients
only pay $25 week?
MARCELA SAPONE: You're
essentially sharing the cost of
a personal assistant. That
Alfred
is serving multiple people.
PAUL SOLMAN: How many clients
do you need in an area before
it's economically viable?
MARCELA SAPONE: Anywhere
from four to seven.
PAUL SOLMAN: Boston tech
entrepreneur Nick Relas (ph) got
off the Hello Alfred waiting
list four months ago. A
favorite feature for him,
freshly pressed shirts from the
dry cleaners down the street.
PAUL SOLMAN: So you
couldn't do this yourself?
NICK RELAS, Hello Alfred Client:
That's what my mother asks me.
It's not about proximity.
It's about what time it closes
every day. I don't leave work
until at least 9:00 or
10:00, and I never have time
to get here before it closes.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, Relas'
Alfred takes care of it.
NICK RELAS: You can see
here, it closes at 7:00.
PAUL SOLMAN: And before
wrapping up for the day, she --
real name Lauren -- leaves
him a handwritten summary
of tasks completed.
NICK RELAS: She cleaned up the
apartment a little today, took
out the garbage, fluffed
the bed. Here's what I love
about Alfred. She noticed I was
out of garbage bags.
PAUL SOLMAN: Yes?
NICK RELAS: And she's going
to pick some up for me.
PAUL SOLMAN: But wait a second.
Should we outsource everything?
EVAN SELINGER, Rochester
Institute of Technology: How is
it that we have all become so
pinched, that
we feel we can't do very
much for ourselves?
PAUL SOLMAN: Evan Selinger
teaches philosophy at the
Rochester Institute of
Technology,
is skeptical of outsourcing
apps like Hello Alfred.
EVAN SELINGER: Instead of
actually giving us our time
back, they just open up more
time
for us to be imprisoned in other
ways, often for us to work
longer hours. What kind of
character do we develop, the
more that we outsource? How
does outsourcing change our
interactions with
more and more people?
PAUL SOLMAN: But, on the other
hand, Alfred could free up more
time for professional
interactions,
as folks like Emma Stanton
subcontract lesser tasks.
DR. EMMA STANTON: "We noticed
one of your shirts still had
some small stains on it.
We took it back to the dry
cleaners. Thank you. Have a
great weekend."
So I probably would never even
have noticed that my shirt had
a stain on it. So, I kind of
like
the fact that
they just
picked that up and
dealt with it.
PAUL SOLMAN: And to CEO Marcela
Sapone, it's just a division of
labor that allows
anyone in a dense
neighborhood to buy a butler.
MARCELA SAPONE: There's no
reason you or I can't be just as
extraordinary as Batman.
PAUL SOLMAN: Economics
correspondent Paul Solman,
reporting for the "PBS NewsHour"
from
Boston and New York.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: It's not just the NSA.
Corporations have been
storing massive troves of our
data, and it's not about
national security. It's about
making money. The new book "All
You Can Pay" paints an Orwellian
future, where big
data reigns. We have an excerpt
from the book on our home page.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
We will see you online and again
here tomorrow evening, with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.